@c Local settings

@set gitrepo file:///usr/class/cs140/winter13/pintos/.git
@set localpintoshttppath http://@/www.stanford.edu/@/class/@/cs140/@/pintos/@/pintos.@/tar.gz
@set localpintosbindir /usr/class/cs140/`uname -m`/bin

@set recommendvnc
@set recommendgit
@clear recommendcygwin
@clear recommendcvs

@macro localmachines{}
The CS 140 ``officially supported'' Pintos development machines are
those in the myth, corn, and cardinal clusters.
@end macro

@macro localpathsetup{}
Under @command{csh}, Stanford's login shell, you can do so
with this command:@footnote{The term @samp{`uname -m`} expands to a value
such as @file{x86_64} that indicates the type of computer you're
logged into.}
@example
set path = ( @value{localpintosbindir} $path )
@end example
@noindent
@strong{Notice that both @samp{`} are left single quotes or
``backticks,'' not apostrophes (@samp{'}).}
It is a good idea to add this line to the @file{.cshrc} file
in your home directory.  Otherwise, you'll have to type it every time
you log in.
@end macro

@macro localcrossbuild{}
@end macro

@macro localhonorcodepolicy{}
In the context of Stanford's CS 140 course, please respect the spirit
and the letter of the honor code by refraining from reading any homework
solutions available online or elsewhere.  Reading the source code for
other operating system kernels, such as Linux or FreeBSD, is allowed,
but do not copy code from them literally.  Please cite the code that
inspired your own in your design documentation.
@end macro

@macro localcredits{}
@c none needed
@end macro

@macro localcvspolicy{}
Instead, we recommend integrating your team's changes early and often,
using a source code control system such as Git (@pxref{Git}).
This is less likely to produce surprises, because everyone can see
everyone else's code as it is written, instead of just when it is
finished.  These systems also make it possible to review changes and,
when a change introduces a bug, drop back to working versions of code.
@end macro

@macro localcodingstandards{}
@c If appropriate, describe additional local coding standards here.
@end macro

@macro localdevelopmenttools{}
@c Descriptions of additional, local development tools can be inserted here
@end macro
